Understanding permits and the review process 
Below is a breakdown of the permit types that may be required for your project. In most 
cases, only a building permit, homeowner electrical/plumbing permit or contractor trade 
permits are required. However, if your project does not meet the Land Use Bylaw rules, you 
may require a development permit (e.g. building too close to a property line). If the Land 
Use Bylaw does not currently allow you to build your project on your property, you may also 
need a land use re-designation (e.g. adding a secondary suite). 
Application journey:  - - 
Planning approval: development permit 
Building Safety: building permit, homeowner permit, contractor trade permit  
Building safety approval (building permit) 
A building permit is an application with The City to ensure your project meets the 
minimum National Building Code (Alberta Edition) requirements and, more 
importantly, is safe. The code provides guidance on approved building materials 
and construction methods. 
Examples: building a deck in your backyard or developing your basement. 
Homeowner electrical/plumbing permit 
A homeowner electrical/plumbing permit or a contractor trade permit is an 
application with The City to ensure your project is safe and meets the minimum 
requirements of the respective codes. These codes provide guidance on approved 
building materials and construction methods. 
Examples: wiring your garage for power or adding a shower to your bathroom. 
Planning approval (development permit) 
A development permit (DP) is an application submitted to The City for a project that 
either does not meet the Land Use Bylaw rules or requires a DP as directed by The 
City’s development approval authority. The authority exercises discretion on its 
decision to require (or not require) a DP. When making its determination, the 
authority considers the impact to neighboring properties or to the community. 
This process allows The City to make sure your project will fit in with the community 
and gives the public a chance to provide feedback. 
Examples: building your raised deck up to the property line or adding a rooftop 
deck on your garage. 
Land use re-designation permit 
A land use re-designation permit is an application with The City to change what is 
allowed on your property. This review process assesses the context within the 
community and requires City Council approval. 
Examples: building a secondary suite where not allowed or changing your single 
house property to build a skyscraper. 
More info 
For detailed information on Calgary land use and development rules, view the Land 
Use Bylaw. 
The National Building Code (Alberta Edition) can be viewed through the public 
library or purchased through the Government of Canada. 